 
 Important Topics 
Operating Systems: 
Operating system functions, Different types of O.S.: batch, multi-programmed, 
timesharing, real-time, distributed, parallel. 
 I/O structure, storage structure, storage hierarchy, operating system structure 
(simple, layered, virtual machine), O/S services, system calls. 
Concept of processes, process scheduling, operations on processes, co-operating 
processes, interprocess communication, context switching, process states 
Threads overview, benefits of threads, user and kernel threads. 
CPU scheduling : scheduling criteria, preemptive & non-preemptive scheduling, 
scheduling algorithms (FCFS,SJF, RR, priority) 
Process Synchronization: critical section, classical problems of synchronization, 
semaphores. 
Deadlocks: deadlock characterization, methods for handling deadlocks, deadlock 
prevention, deadlock avoidance, deadlock detection, recovery from deadlock. 
Memory Management : logical vs. physical address space, swapping, contiguous 
memory allocation, paging, inverted page table, segmentation. 
Virtual Memory: demand paging, page replacement, page replacement algorithms 
(FCFS, LRU), Belady’s Anomoly, thrashing. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Sample Questions for interview on Operating Systems: 
1. What is IPC? What are the different IPC mechanisms? 
2. What's the main purpose of an OS? What are the different types of OS? 
3. What are the benefits of a multiprocessor system? 
4. What is RAID structure in OS? What are the different levels of RAID 
configuration? 
5. What is GUI? 
6. What is a Pipe and when it is used? 
7. What are the different kinds of operations that are possible on semaphore? 
8. What is a bootstrap program in OS? 
9. Explain demand paging? 
10. What do you mean by RTOS? 
11. What do you mean by process synchronization? 
12. Why is the operating system important? 
13. What is different between main memory and secondary memory. 
14. What do you mean by overlays in OS? 
15. What is thrashing in OS? 
16. What is the main objective of multiprogramming? 
17. What do you mean by asymmetric clustering? 
18. What is the difference between multitasking and multiprocessing OS? 
19. What do you mean by Sockets in OS? 
20. Explain zombie process? 
21. What do you mean by cascading termination? 
22. What is starvation and aging in OS? 
23. What is the difference between paging and segmentation? 
24. What is virtual memory? 
25. What is thread in OS? 
26. What is a process? What are the different states of a process? 
27. What do you mean by FCFS? 
28. What is Reentrancy? 
29. What is a Scheduling Algorithm? Name different types of scheduling 
algorithms. 

 
 30. What are different types of Kernel? 
31. What do you mean by Semaphore in OS? Why is it used? 
32. What is Kernel and write its main functions? 
33. Write difference between micro kernel and monolithic kernel? 
34. What is SMP (Symmetric Multiprocessing)? 
35. What is a time-sharing system? 
36. What is Context Switching? 
37. What is difference between Kernel and OS? 
38. What is difference between process and thread? 
39. What are various sections of the process? 
40. What is a deadlock in OS? What are the necessary conditions for a deadlock? 
41. What do you mean by Belady’s Anomaly? 
42. What is spooling in OS? 
 
DBMS: 
Overview of DBMS, Data Models, Database Languages, Three Schema 
architecture of DBMS. Entity-Relationship Model [6L] Basic concepts, Design 
Issues, Mapping Constraints, Keys, Entity-Relationship Diagram, Weak Entity Sets, 
Structure of relational Databases, Relational Algebra, Relational Calculus, 
Extended Relational Algebra Operations, Views, Modifications Of the Database.   
SQL and Integrity Constraints, Concept of DDL, DML, DCL. Basic Structure, Set 
operations, Aggregate Functions, Null Values, Domain Constraints, Referential 
Integrity Constraints, assertions, views, Nested Subqueries,  Database security 
application development using SQL, Stored procedures and triggers.  Functional 
Dependency, Different anamolies in designing a Database., Normalization using 
funtional dependencies, Decomposition, Boyce-Codd  Normal Form, 3NF, 
Nomalization using multi-valued depedencies, 4NF, 5NF                                                
Query optimization, joins 
 
 

 
 Sample Questions for interview on DBMS: 
1. What is the difference between inner join and outer join? 
2. What is the definition of Integrity Constraints? 
3. Define Primary key, Candidate key, Super Key, Alternate Key and Foreign 
Key. 
4. Why normalization is required in DBMS? 
5. What is functional dependency?  
6. What are the types of Functional dependency? Explain it. (Full, Partial, 
Multivalved) 
7. What is Amstrong Axioms? 
8. What is the ACID property? 
9. What is shadow paging? 
10. Why BCNF is better than 3NF? 
11. What is Weak Entity and Strong Entity? 
12. What is Generalisation and Aggregation? 
13. What is derived and Multi-valued attribute? 
14. What is Null attribute? 
15. What is the difference between Join and Union? 
16. What are the Dangling Tuple and Spurious Tuple? 
17. Which normal form is considered adequate for relational database design? 
 
18. If every non key attribute is functionally dependent on the primary key, 
then the relation will be in which normal form? 
19. What are advantages of DBMS over traditional file based systems?  
20. What are super, primary, candidate and foreign keys?  
21. What is the difference between primary key and unique constraints?  
22. What is database normalization?  
23. What are the differences between DDL, DML and DCL in SQL?  
24. What is a view in SQL? How to create one  
25. What is the difference between Trigger and Stored Procedure?  
26. What is a transaction? 
27. Describe the three levels of data abstraction?  

 
 28. Define the "integrity rules"?  
29. What is Data Independence?  
30. What is Data Model?  
31. What is an Entity?  
32. What is degree of a Relation?  
33. What is Relationship?  
34. What is Functional Dependency?  
35. What is Lossless join property?  
36. What is Fully Functional dependency?  
37. What is 2NF? Explain with example. 
38. What is 3NF? Explain with example. 
39. What is BCNF (Boyce-Codd Normal Form)? Explain with example. 
40. What is 4NF? Explain with example. 
41. What is 5NF? Explain with example. 
42. What is Domain-Key Normal Form?  
43. What do you mean by atomicity and aggregation?  
44. What is a Phantom Deadlock?  
45. What is normalization? 
46. What is the difference between primary key and candidate key?? 
47. What is meant by query optimization? 
48. What is RDBMS KERNEL? 
49. Describe concurrency control. 
50. What is Data Independence? 
51. What is a Phantom Deadlock? 
52. Describe the three levels of data abstraction.  
53. Differentiate between DBMS and RDBMS. 
54. Differentiate between extension and intension. 
55. Differentiate between Delete and Truncate table. 
56. What is a materialized view? 
57. What do you mean by Cluster and Non cluster Index? 
58. What are B-trees? 
59. What is the difference between primary key and unique constraints? 
60. Do you think BCNF is better than 2NF & 3NF? Why? 

 
 Software Engineering: 
 
System Development Life Cycle, Waterfall Model, Spiral Model, Feasibility 
Analysis, Technical Feasibility, Cost- Benefit Analysis, COCOMO model. Context 
diagram and DFD, Problem Partitioning, Top-Down and Bottom-Up design, 
Decision tree, decision table, Structured Programming, OO Programming, 
Information Hiding, Reuse, System Documentation. Levels of Testing, Integration 
Testing, Test case Specification, Reliability Assessment, Validation & Verification 
Metrics, Monitoring & Control. Software Project Management – Project 
Scheduling, Staffing, Software Configuration Management, Quality Assurance, 
Project Monitoring. Fundamentals of Object Oriented design in UML, Static and 
dynamic models, why modeling, UML diagrams: Class diagram, interaction 
diagram: collaboration diagram, sequence diagram, state chart diagram, activity 
diagram, implementation diagram. 
 
Sample Questions on Software Engineering: 
 
1. When you know programming, what is the need to learn software 
engineering concepts? 
2. What is SDLC? Which SDLC model is the best in your opinion? 
3. What are software project estimation techniques available? 
4. What is the difference between structured English and Pseudo Code? 
5. What is the difference between function-oriented and object-oriented 
design? 
6. Differentiate validation and verification? 
7. What is black-box and white-box testing? 
8. What is software re-engineering? 
9. What are CASE tools? 
10. What is the difference cohesion and coupling? 
11. What is alpha and beta testing? 
12. Mention the categories of debugging approaches? 
13. Mention some of the process models appropriate for the software to be 
engineered? 

 
 14. What is the difference between software engineering and system 
engineering? 
15. What is software configuration model? 
16.  What is bottom-up and top-down approach. 
 
Computer Networking: 
 
Direction of data flow (simplex, half duplex, full duplex); network criteria, physical 
structure (type of connection, topology), categories of network (LAN, MAN,WAN); 
OSI reference model, TCP/IP model. Data (analog & digital), Signal(analog & 
digital), Transmission (analog & digital) & transmission media (guided & 
unguided); Circuit switching: time division & space division switch, TDM, Data link 
Layer,Types of errors, framing(character and bit stuffing), error detection & 
correction methods, Flow control, Stop & wait ARQ, Go-Back- N ARQ, Selective 
repeat ARQ, HDLC, Point to Point Protocol, LCP, NCP, Token Ring, Reservation, 
Polling, Multiple access protocols: Pure ALOHA, Slotted ALOHA, CSMA, CSMA/CD, 
CSMA/CA Traditional Ethernet, Repeaters, Hubs, Bridges, Switches, Router, 
Gateway; Addressing : IP addressing, subnetting; Routing : techniques, static vs. 
dynamic routing , Unicast Routing Protocols: RIP, OSPF, BGP; Other Procols: ARP, 
IP, ICMP, IPV6, Process to Process delivery; UDP; TCP; Quality of service: 
techniques to improve QoS: Leaky bucket algorithm, Token bucket algorithm, 
DNS, SMTP, SNMP, FTP, HTTP & WWW 
 
Sample Questions on Computer Networking: 
 
1. What is Piggy Backing? 
2. What is a gateway? What is a Router? 
3. Explain RIP (Routing Information Protocol). 
4. What is Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP)? 
5. What is difference between ARP and RARP? 
6. What is difference between baseband and broadband transmission? 
7. What is Kerberos? 
8. What are different ways of securing a computer network? 

 
 9. What is traffic shaping? 
10. What are the advantages of Distributed Processing? 
11. Name the factors that affect the performance of the network? 
12. Define the terms Unicasting, Multiccasting and Broadcasting? 
13. What are the responsibilities of Data Link Layer? 
14. What is usage of Sequence Number in Reliable Transmission? 
15. Difference between bit rate and baud rate. 
16. What is IP Address? 
17. What is a private IP address? How is it different from a public IP address? 
18. What is MAC Address? 
19. What is Port Address? 
20. What is the difference between Classfull Addressing and Classless 
Addressing? 
21. What is the difference between Hub and Switch? 
22. What is the difference between TCP and IP? 
23. What is the difference between GSM and CDMA? 
24. What is subnet mask? 
25. What is the job of the Network Layer under the OSI reference model? 
26. What is DHCP? 
27. What is the difference between CSMA/CD and CSMA/CA? 
28. What is RSA algorithm? 
29. What is point to point link? 
30. What is topology? Explain different types topologies mentioning their 
advantages and disadvantages. 
31. Different layers of OSI and TCP/IP model and their functions. 
32. What are the different Transmission modes? 
33. What do you mean by data transparency problem? How bit stuffing solve 
this problem?  
34. Define the terms Unicasting, Multicasting and Broadcasting? 
35. Explain the concept of redundancy related to error detection and error 
correction. 
36. How does CRC and Checksum work? 

 
 37. What is the relation between number of redundant bits and number of 
data bits in case of hamming code technique? 
38. Compare between  (i) stop and wait protocol and sliding window protocol 
(ii) Go back N and selective repeat ARQ  (iii) Circuit switching and packet 
switching  (iv) Pure Aloha and Slotted Aloha (v) CSMA/CD and CSMA/CA  (vi) 
Static IP and Dynamic IP  (vii) TCP and UDP      (viii) Hub and Switch. 
39.  What is MAC address? How it is differ from logical address. 
40. What are IP address and their classes? Purpose of classless addressing. 
41. What is sub netting?  Explain default mask and subnet mask. 
42. What is Routing? Compare dynamic routing and static routing. 
43. What do you mean by interior and exterior routing protocol? Give 
examples of both. 
 
Object Oriented Programming using Java: 
 
Object, Class, relationships among objects, aggregation, links, relationships 
among classes-association, aggregation, using, instantiation, meta-class, grouping 
constructs. Object oriented concepts, Difference between OOP and other 
conventional programming – advantages and disadvantages. Class, object, 
message passing, inheritance, encapsulation, polymorphism  
 
Sample Questions on OOP: 
 
1. What is data encapsulation, and why is it useful? 
2. What is polymorphism? 
3. What are the types of polymorphism, and how do they differ? 
4. What does an interface in Java refer to? 
5. What are constructors in Java? 
6. Name and explain the types of constructors in Java. 
7.  What is JDK? 
8.  What is JVM? 
9.  What is JRE? 
10.  In Java, what are the differences between heap and stack memory? 

 
 11.  What is a JIT compiler? 
12.  How does a JIT compiler differ from a standard compiler? 
13.  What is an inner class? 
14.  What is a subclass? 
15.  What is a package in Java? 
16.  How can developers use packages in Java? 
17.  What are the advantages of packages in Java? 
18. Java class, variable, objects, and argument questions 
19.  What is a class in Java? 
20.  What are the different types of variables in Java? 
21.  How do you use a method in Java? 
22.  What is a Java object? 
23.  What is a singleton class, and how can it be used? 
24.  What is a constructor in Java? 
25.  What does the term constructor overloading mean? 
26.  How are non-primitive variables used in Java? 
27.  In Java, what is a static variable? 
28.  What are Java data types, and how are they grouped? 
29.  How do you define primitive data types and describe each by size and 
description? 
30.  What do the terms autoboxing and unboxing mean in Java? 
31.  What are wrapper classes in Java? 
32.  In Java, what are the differences between methods and constructors? 
33.  Can you override a private method or static method in Java? 
34.  What is method hiding? 
35.  What is the difference between equals() and == in Java? 
36.  Can you write multiple catch blocks under a single try block? 
 
Data Structures: 
 
Why we need data structure?  Difference between Abstract Data Type and 
Primitive Data Type.   Algorithm efficiency and analysis, time and space analysis of 
algorithms, Different representations – row major, column major.  Sparse matrix - 

 
 its implementation and usage. Array representation of polynomials, Linked List -- 
Singly linked list, circular linked list, doubly linked list, linked list representation of 
polynomial and applications. Stack and its implementations (using array, using 
linked list), applications. Queue, circular queue, dequeue. Implementation of 
queue- both linear and circular (using array, using linked list), applications. 
Principles of recursion – use of stack, differences between recursion and iteration, 
tail recursion. Applications  - The Tower of Hanoi, Eight Queens Puzzle. Nonlinear 
Data structures : forest, tree representation (using array, using linked list).  Binary 
trees - binary tree traversal (pre-, in-, post- order), threaded binary tree (left, 
right, full) - non-recursive traversal algorithms using threaded binary tree, 
expression tree. Binary search tree- operations (creation, insertion, deletion, 
searching). Height balanced binary tree – AVL tree (insertion, deletion with 
examples only). B- Trees – operations (insertion, deletion with examples only). 
Graph definitions and concepts (directed/undirected graph, weighted/un-
weighted edges, sub-graph, degree, cutvertex/articulation point, pendant node, 
clique, complete graph, connected components – strongly connected component, 
weakly connected component, path, shortest path, isomorphism). Graph 
representations/storage implementations – adjacency matrix, adjacency list, 
adjacency multi-list. Graph traversal and connectivity – Depth-first search (DFS), 
Breadth-first search (BFS) – concepts of edges used in DFS and BFS (tree-edge, 
back-edge, cross-edge, forward-edge), applications.  Minimal spanning tree – 
Prim’s algorithm (basic idea of greedy methods). 